---
layout: post
title: "Fedora 22 libvirt with bridge"
date: 2015-09-24
tags:
- linux
- fedora
---
{{ page.title }}
================

Fedora 22 comes with libvirt and NetworkManager and it is pre-configured with
"default" NAT network. That's fine, until you want to reach the NATed servers
from your LAN.

Good solution is network interface bridging. It was always a pain to configure
this, but in Fedora 21 most of bugs were fixed and now it is possible to
configure everything via NetworkManager.

In this tutorial, I will show you how to configure things without GUI. The
commands below adds bridge in the system and reconfigures primary wired
connection over that bridge. Make sure you set `MAIN_CONN` variable to the
correct connection (use `nmcli c show` to find it).

I recommend to execute this in screen or tmux because connection *will* be
lost during execution! Comment out IPv4 static configuration, if that's your
case.

    bash -x <<EOS
    systemctl stop libvirtd
    MAIN_CONN=enp8s0
    nmcli c delete "$MAIN_CONN"
    nmcli c add type bridge ifname br0 autoconnect yes stp off
    #nmcli c modify br0 ipv4.addresses 192.168.1.99/24 ipv4.method manual
    #nmcli c modify br0 ipv4.gateway 192.168.1.1
    #nmcli c modify br0 ipv4.dns 192.168.1.1
    nmcli c add type bridge-slave autoconnect yes con-name "$MAIN_CONN" ifname "$MAIN_CONN" master br0
    systemctl restart NetworkManager
    systemctl start libvirtd
    sysctl -p /usr/lib/sysctl.d/00-system.conf
    EOS

Do not, I repeat, do not execute this one by one. You need to do this in one
"transaction" because connection will be lost and screen wont help you in this
case. That's why I use `bash -x HEREDOC` there.

Now, when creating a VM in libvirt, make sure you select "br0" as the
interface to use bridged networking. That's all for today!
