---
layout: post
title: "Probing Ruby 2.0 apps with SystemTap in RHEL7"
date: 2016-08-02
tags:
- linux
- fedora
- systemtap
---
{{ page.title }}
================

Few years ago, I wrote an article about SystemTap and Ruby in RHEL6. When RHEL
7.0 was released, things changed. It has Ruby 2.0 and the Ruby SystemTap API
changed as well, therefore I am updating my old article today according to new
changes.

Imagine you have a Ruby application that has some performance issues on a
production server and it's running RHEL 7.0 or newer. With SystemTap, you can
easily peek into the running application and investigate bottlenecks or count
memory objects. If you know DTrace from other operating systems, welcome home.

Installation of SystemTap is easy and straightforward and for our purposes we
do not need to install kernel devel and debug info packages.

    # yum -y install systemtap systemtap-runtime ruby

Let's create a trivial application called factorial.rb.

    # cat factorial.rb
    def factorial n
      f = 1; for i in 1..n; f *= i; end; f
    end
    puts factorial ARGV[1].to_i

And a simple SystemTap script that shows method calls:

    # cat rubycalls.stp
    probe ruby.cmethod.entry
    {
      if (file == "factorial.rb") {
        printf("%s => %s.%s in %s:%d\n", thread_indent(1), classname, methodname, file, line);
      }
    }
    probe ruby.cmethod.return
    {
      if (file == "factorial.rb") {
        printf("%s <= %s.%s in %s:%d\n", thread_indent(-1), classname, methodname, file, line);
      }
    }

Let's just run it for now.)

    # stap rubycalls.stp -c "ruby factorial.rb 4"
    24
     0 ruby(18989): => IO.set_encoding in factorial.rb:0
     6 ruby(18989): <= IO.set_encoding in factorial.rb:0
     0 ruby(18989): => IO.set_encoding in factorial.rb:0
     5 ruby(18989): <= IO.set_encoding in factorial.rb:0
     0 ruby(18989): => #<Class:0x00000000af8c78>.core#define_method in factorial.rb:1
     5 ruby(18989):  => Module.method_added in factorial.rb:1
     8 ruby(18989):  <= Module.method_added in factorial.rb:1
    39 ruby(18989): <= #<Class:0x00000000af8c78>.core#define_method in factorial.rb:1
     0 ruby(18989): => Range.each in factorial.rb:2
     4 ruby(18989): <= Range.each in factorial.rb:2
     0 ruby(18989): => Kernel.puts in factorial.rb:4
     6 ruby(18989):  => IO.puts in factorial.rb:4
    14 ruby(18989):   => Fixnum.to_s in factorial.rb:4
    17 ruby(18989):   <= Fixnum.to_s in factorial.rb:4
    21 ruby(18989):   => IO.write in factorial.rb:4
    39 ruby(18989):   <= IO.write in factorial.rb:4
    42 ruby(18989):   => IO.write in factorial.rb:4
    47 ruby(18989):   <= IO.write in factorial.rb:4
    49 ruby(18989):  <= IO.puts in factorial.rb:4
    51 ruby(18989): <= Kernel.puts in factorial.rb:4

Please note you have to run SystemTap under root account and also expect the
first run to be a little bit slower, because SystemTap is compiling and
inserting a kernel module under the hood.

SystemTap syntax is similar to C and the easiest way of learning it is reading [SystemTap Beginners Guide](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-US/Red_Hat_Enterprise_Linux/7/html/SystemTap_Beginners_Guide/). From the book:

*SystemTap allows users to write and reuse simple scripts to deeply examine the
activities of a running Linux system. These scripts can be designed to extract
data, filter it, and summarize it quickly (and safely), enabling the diagnosis
of complex performance (or even functional) problems.*

*The essential idea behind a SystemTap script is to name events, and to give
them handlers. When SystemTap runs the script, SystemTap monitors for the
event; once the event occurs, the Linux kernel then runs the handler as a quick
sub-routine, then resumes.*

*There are several kinds of events; entering or exiting a function, timer
expiration, session termination, etc. A handler is a series of script language
statements that specify the work to be done whenever the event occurs. This
work normally includes extracting data from the event context, storing them
into internal variables, and printing results.*

The following example will count method calls to quickly search for
bottlenecks. If you don't understand how it works, head over to the Beginners
Guide for more details.

    # cat rubystack.stp
    #!/usr/bin/stap·

    global fn_calls;

    probe ruby.cmethod.entry
    {
      fn_calls[classname, methodname] <<< 1;
    }

    probe end {
      foreach ([classname, methodname] in fn_calls- limit 30) {
        printf("%dx %s.%s\n", @count(fn_calls[classname, methodname]), classname, methodname);
      }

      delete fn_calls;
    }

Everytime a Ruby method is entered, counter is incremented by one in a global
associative array. It prints top thirty counters on exit. When we run it, it's
a surprise!

    # stap rubystack.stp -c "ruby factorial.rb 42"
    1405006117752879898543142606244511569936384000000000
    2823x Module.===
    1728x BasicObject.==
    1728x Kernel.===
    997x Symbol.to_s
    980x Kernel.initialize_dup
    979x Kernel.dup
    960x Kernel.instance_variable_set
    683x Hash.[]=
    676x String.to_s
    499x String.initialize_copy
    445x Class.new
    386x String.gsub
    384x Array.initialize_copy
    327x Kernel.class
    320x Module.method_added
    315x Array.each
    286x Array.flatten
    260x File.file?
    242x #<Class:0x00000002402d90>.core#define_method
    236x String.<=>
    220x String.to_i
    204x Enumerable.any?
    179x File.join
    179x String.strip
    177x Regexp.=~
    164x Kernel.respond_to?
    164x Kernel.untaint
    156x String.=~
    149x Array.last
    146x Array.compact!

I'd expect multiplying operation (`Bignum.*`) but we see equality of module
instead. Since we count *all* the method calls, we can see what Ruby needs to
done in the backround to load such a trivial example. It's actually rubygems
gem which ships with Ruby 2.0 that does the loading mechanics (and it's poorly
designed in my opinion).

Anyway, if you want to see the bignum thing, increase the parameter from 42 to
let's say 500. Now another example, slightly modified example from the [SystemTap Wiki](https://sourceware.org/systemtap/wiki/RubyMarker):

    # cat rubytop.stp
    #!/usr/bin/stap

    global fn_calls;

    probe ruby.cmethod.entry
    {
      fn_calls[pid(), file, methodname, line] <<< 1;
    }

    probe timer.ms(1000) {
      ansi_clear_screen()
      printf("%6s %30s %6s %30s %6s\n", "PID", "FILENAME", "LINE", "FUNCTION", "CALLS")
      foreach ([pid, filename, funcname, lineno] in fn_calls- limit 20) {
        printf("%6d %30s %6d %30s %6d\n", pid, filename, lineno, funcname, @count(fn_calls[pid, filename, funcname, lineno]));
      }
      delete fn_calls;
    }

Now run the example with huge input that will cause it to loop for some time:

    # stap rubytop.stp -c "ruby factorial.rb 999999999"

You should see a top-like screen which refreshes every second. The initial
page will be full of method calls while from second one you will only see
increasing counter of the multiply method:

      PID                       FILENAME   LINE                       FUNCTION CALLS
    21185                   factorial.rb      2                              * 9904

If you want to sum all calls instead, delete the `delete` statement on the
last line of the timer probe block.

SystemTap Ruby markers in RHEL 7.0 offers the following probes:

    ruby.array.create
    ruby.cmethod.entry
    ruby.cmethod.return
    ruby.find.require.entry
    ruby.find.require.return
    ruby.gc.mark.begin
    ruby.gc.mark.end
    ruby.gc.sweep.begin
    ruby.gc.sweep.end
    ruby.hash.create
    ruby.load.entry
    ruby.load.return
    ruby.method.entry
    ruby.method.return
    ruby.object.create
    ruby.parse.begin
    ruby.parse.end
    ruby.raise
    ruby.require.entry
    ruby.require.return
    ruby.string.create

To probe objects creation, replace `ruby.cmethod.entry` with
`ruby.object.create`, delete the `delete fn_calls` statement and reload. It is
also possible to attach to existing process:

    # stap rubytop.stp -x 12345

When using Software Collections, note the correct SCL enable syntax (credit to
[Pavel Valena](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1362437) from Red Hat):

    # scl enable rh-ruby22 -- stap rubystack.stp -c "ruby factorial.rb 5"

That's all for now.
