---
layout: post
title: "ASUS B350 PLUS EFI settings for Linux"
date: 2020-08-05
tags:
- linux
- fedora
---
{{ page.title }}
================

It's been two years on my Ryzen 1700, 32GB RAM and Saphire 5600XT however after
Fedora reinstallation after (another) SSD failure I started experiencing random
hangs of the graphical subsystem (I could still ssh to my workstation). Some
people recommended turning off IOMMU, so I took the opportunity to upgrade to
latest EFI firmware and review all my settings. These are the best (and safest)
ASUS B350-PLUS changed firmware settings optimized for Linux from my own
experience.

* CPU\SVM = Enabled
* CPU\SMT = Disabled
* AMD CBS\C-State = Disabled
* AMD CBS\IOMMU = Disabled
* Boot\Fast boot = Disabled
* Boot\Boot logo = Disabled
* Boot\POST delay = 2 sec
* Boot\Wait for F1 = Disabled
* Boot\Setup mode = Advanced

This solves several issues I had in the past. Virtualization is turned off by
default, SVM enables it. Multi-threading is enabled and although this is not a
thread on AMD CPUs I like to turn this off as it caused some issues in the
past. C-State and IOMMU can be problematic for AMD GPUs and the rest is just
optimizing boot process for my LG screen as it does poweroff sometimes when
using Fastboot.

I also have
[ryzen-stabilizator](https://github.com/qrwteyrutiyoup/ryzen-stabilizator)
script during the boot to turn off few more CPU flags to prevent from random
MCE freezing. This has probably been fixed and workarounded in Linux kernel,
but I am lazy to test this and I want to live on the safe side:

    # cat /etc/rc.d/rc.local
    #!/bin/sh
    /usr/local/bin/ryzen-stabilizator --disable-c6 --disable-boosting --disable-aslr -enable-psicworkaround

The author of this tool suggests to set Power Supply Idle Control to Typical
Current Idle, however I was not able to find this setting in my firmware.

I will update this blogpost on the fly if I encounter any other instability of
my setup in the future. Overall, I am quite happy with AMD-only hardware. Sure,
it's not as stable as Intel, but I am glad there's a competition again in the
industry.
